Greetings, brothers and sisters.
Today's session will begin with a music video presentation.
If you have a cell phone or other electronic device,
please adjust it to a setting that will not disturb others.
We now encourage you to watch and listen to the music video presentation,
which shows the joy that comes from disciple making.
Please enjoy.
Welcome to the next session of this always-rejoice, regional convention.
During this session and the next one,
you will hear the talks listed under the Saturday heading of your printed program.
The scripture theme for today's program is taken from Psalm 105, verse 3,
where we read,
both about his holy name,
let the hearts of those seeking Jehovah rejoice.
We will focus on improving our skills as disciplesmakers,
and we will see how the disciple making work leads to joy.
We now invite all to stand and share in singing song number 53, entitled,
Preparing to Preach.
After the song, you may pause the program to ask Jehovah for his blessing
on our day's activity.
Again, that song number 53.
Please be seated.
To make disciples, we must be effective preachers and teachers.
How can you stimulate interest in the kingdom message,
and then help that interest to grow?
Our first symposium of this session will consider six necessary skills.
Each speaker will introduce the one to follow.
Please give your attention to Brother David Schaeffer, a helper to the teaching committee.
He will begin with the theme,
Experience the joy of disciple making, improve your skills, asking questions.
How do you feel about doing things that you do well?
Have you ever noticed that people who are experts at what they do seem to enjoy the job,
whatever it is, and they delight in training others?
This is because the more people there are who understand how to support a project,
make music, or play a game,
the more enjoyable it is when we combine forces as a group, a team, an orchestra.
There's a direct correlation between skill and joy.
So how do you feel about the work of making disciples?
Turn with me, please, to Luke chapter 10.
Jesus loved making disciples.
Psalm 40 and verse 8 says prophetically concerning Jesus to do your will,
oh my God, is my delight.
And notice here that Luke 10.21 tells us that when Jesus was contemplating the results
of a particular preaching campaign,
He became overjoyed, overjoyed in the Holy Spirit.
Jesus was a masterful teacher, but as this chapter of the Bible shows,
He helped His disciples to become skillful as well.
And thus, as pointed out at Luke 10.17, they also found joy in this work.
Our joy grows as we work to improve our skills.
So this symposium will discuss six essential skills that can help us to become
not just more effective preachers, but effective disciple makers.
What skills are required?
You see them listed on your program?
Asking questions, unleashing the power of God's Word,
illustrating key points, teaching with enthusiasm, showing empathy, and reaching the heart.
This symposium includes a series of dramatizations that follow the progress of one Bible student,
after each video will discuss the skill that was featured and how we can use it.
This will help us to experience more joy in our disciple making work.
Are you ready?
Let's discuss our first skill.
Asking questions, why should we ask questions?
Questions serve a number of purposes.
Sometimes we pose them just to stimulate interest and to get the conversation rolling.
At other times, we're interested in hearing how a person thinks so that we can know better how to direct the conversation.
A turn with me, please, to Matthew chapter 22.
Jesus knew what was in man.
He could read hearts, so he didn't need people to tell him where they stood on certain issues.
Still, he used questions to encourage his listeners to reason things out for themselves.
Notice how he did that here in Matthew chapter 22 verses 41 through 45.
Now while the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them.
What do you think about the Christ?
Whose son is he?
They said to him, David's.
He asked them.
How is it then that David under inspiration calls him Lord, saying,
Jehovah said to my Lord, sit at my right hand until I put your enemies beneath your feet.
If then David calls him Lord, how is he his son?
Four questions.
Now wouldn't it have been easier, quicker, just to tell people the answers?
Possibly.
But those questions led honest-hearted ones to draw accurate conclusions for themselves,
while at the same time revealing the true motives of opposers.
Questions are powerful.
But when we use them, we should keep in mind the words of James 119.
Notice what this says, James 119.
Know this, my beloved brothers.
Everyone must be quick to listen, slow to speak, slow to anger.
To ask a question without waiting for the answer would be like making an appointment to meet a friend,
but then leaving before he arrived.
It was our question, so we should wait for the answer.
Wait for it.
Not in a way that makes people feel uncomfortable, but by listening kindly.
By listening, we, in effect, say, you are important to me.
Now, unlike Jesus, we don't already know what's going on inside of people,
so it's not until they answer our question that we can tailor our comments to fit their situation.
In the following dramatization, notice how a disciple maker uses questions skillfully.
I'm sorry, what?
Your science says learn Bible truths.
So, I assume you're here to share said truths, so share one.
My name's Nita, what's yours?
Jade.
Like the stone?
No, like I'm jaded.
Are you going to share something or what?
Yeah, did you know the Bible says you can live forever?
Heaven, that's what you're sharing.
That's not exactly new, is it?
No, I mean, did you know the Bible says you can live forever on earth?
But why would I want that?
This place is a mess.
But it won't be in the future.
Revelation 21 verse 4 promises,
and he will wipe out every tear from their eyes,
and death will be no more.
Neither will morning nor outcry, nor pain be anymore.
The former things have passed away.
Since there's no death or pain in heaven,
where would this promise to play?
The earth.
I didn't know the Bible said that.
Look it.
I mean, that's cool.
Oh, okay.
Would you like to learn how to be part of that future?
Uh, yeah.
Um, thanks.
I'm not really the churchy type, and I'm late, so see you later.
Did you notice how Nita prefaced some of her questions?
Did you know?
Did you know the Bible says you can live forever?
No, I mean, did you know the Bible says you can live forever on earth?
A thought-provoking question to get the conversation started.
Now, maybe it's been a little while since you were able to stand in a public place
with a witnessing card as we saw Nita doing here.
But we can have conversations on the phone, perhaps in stores, in the park.
Questions also work well in letters.
Of course, it's easy for us to think of questions on topics that interest us.
But what is needed is to think of questions that others will enjoy answering.
Such questions as,
Did you know that the Bible describes a time when sickness will be no more?
Do you think we'll ever see true economic security?
It would be nice to be able to plan.
What do you think is a reliable source of information about the future?
Do you think we could be living in what the Bible calls the last days?
I've noticed that many people still pray, especially when they have problems.
Do you think anyone listens to prayers?
Does God listen to all prayers?
Viewpoint questions.
Viewpoint questions invite people to express their thoughts.
Often, Jesus would pause,
ask people what they thought,
and then listen to their response.
For example, after the death of Martha's brother Lazarus,
Jesus told her as recorded in John chapter 11 verses 25 and 26.
Everyone who is living and exercises faith in me will never die at all.
But then he asked her,
Do you believe this?
And then he listened as she expressed her faith.
This type of question can be very effective in our disciple-making work.
Or, like Jesus, we can use a series of questions to help people reason.
In the video, did you notice how after reading Revelation 214,
Nita asked Jade,
Since there's no death or pain in heaven,
where would this promise apply?
And then she asked,
Would you like to learn how to be a part of that future?
We improve our skills by imitating Jesus.
And as our skill improves, our joy increases.
Jesus delighted to make disciples and we can too.
By asking questions and then listening to people's answers,
we may help some of them to accept the good news.
And we will definitely experience firsthand the joy of disciple-making.
Brother Patrick LaFranca, a helper to the Personnel Committee,
will now present the next part of this symposium.
Experience the joy of disciple-making, improve your skills,
unleashing the power of God's Word.
As disciples-makers, we are somewhat like a carpenter who has a toolbox.
And inside he has hand tools and he has power tools.
He likes the power tools because they save him a lot of time and energy.
He has a power drill that can penetrate hard wood.
He has a power sander that can strip away layers of built-up grime.
He has a power nailer that can nail together pieces very quickly.
Well, likewise, we have a teaching toolbox.
And inside we have many useful tools.
But there's no question the most powerful tool we have is God's Word.
Notice how the Apostle Paul described God's Word in Hebrews chapter 4 and verse 12.
For the Word of God is alive and exerts power and is sharper than any two-edged sword
and pierces even to the dividing of soul and spirit and of joints from the marrow
and is able to discern thoughts and intentions of the heart.
So Paul says it's like a sword that can pierce right to the heart.
Now, is that important in our disciple-making work?
Yes, because we cannot read hearts.
But when we use God's powerful Word, we begin to discern whether the person
is rightly disposed toward everlasting life and we can perhaps help that person.
Like using the carpenter-powered tools, why it can penetrate right to the heart of a person.
It can strip away what's on the surface and help the person realize what he really is.
It can really nail down the points.
The Apostle Paul realized God's Word was dynamic.
That's why it's described that way.
It's dynamic because it comes from the living God, Jehovah.
You see, these words are not just words on a page.
Jesus said, these are words from the mouth of Jehovah.
A brother asked this question,
if you were preaching from house to house with Jehovah himself,
would you do all the speaking or would you allow him to talk?
Yes, when we open the Bible, we are allowing Jehovah to speak,
and that is powerful.
The Apostle Paul went to the city of Thessalonica
and he found Gentiles worshipping lifeless idols.
But what happened?
First Thessalonians 1.9, Paul wrote,
these Gentiles had turned away from their lifeless idols
to serve the true and the living God.
How did that happen?
In chapter 2 verse 13, Paul noted they had received the Word of God
and that Word was at work in those believers.
Paul rejoiced with those results.
And we too, one of our greatest joys,
is to see how a new disciple allows God's Word to work in him
and he makes big changes.
And the following dramatization,
notice how Nida unleashes the power of God's Word.
Yo, so tell me.
Hi, again.
You're really quite stealthy.
Brilliant, right?
Perfect, when I'm late for class,
which is always right.
So, last week, you spoke about promises
and I'm not about church,
but I am about promises.
So?
Okay, well, if these are God's promises,
wouldn't it make sense to go to His Word
to find out how to enjoy them?
Seems right.
Okay.
This is John 173.
Would you like to read it?
Out loud?
Really?
Then you know what it says?
I do, but it's nice to hear it again.
This means everlasting life.
They're coming to know you,
the only true God,
and the one whom you sent of Jesus Christ.
So, based on this,
what means everlasting life?
Getting to know God?
But how can you get to know something?
You're not even sure exists.
Would you like to explore that answer next time you come by?
Who said anything about it next time?
Oh, I just wanted you up.
See it out.
Did you see how Nita unleashed the power of God's Word?
She asked a simple question
that led to reading John 173.
And this is a simple but powerful scripture.
Jesus was the most skillful disciple maker.
He basis teaching completely on God's Word.
And when it was possible,
he actually read from the scriptures.
For example, you may remember the account in Luke chapter 4.
When Jesus went back to his hometown of Nazareth,
he entered the synagogue,
and he read from the scroll of Isaiah.
This is the prophecy about the anointed one
who would preach good news
and God's acceptable year.
But Jesus didn't stop at just reading the scripture.
He explained its meaning.
He said today,
this scripture that you just heard is fulfilled.
And those towns people could have understood that
because he had left the town,
left his carpentry work months earlier
and had begun his ministry.
Likewise, it's not enough for us just to read a scripture.
We must explain its meaning.
And Nita did that.
You remember after John 17 III was read,
she asked this question.
So based on this,
what means everlasting life?
And the girl got it.
It means getting to know God.
What can we do, though,
if our listener doesn't get it?
Well, we can just reread the keywords in that verse.
Also, friends, we must be careful
not to assume that people understand
the terms we commonly use.
For example, we often talk about the kingdom.
Well, to our listener,
they may be thinking of heaven.
They may be thinking it's a condition of one's heart.
Not a government.
So we have to explain.
Also, be patient as we use God's word.
Faith in God and appreciation for the scriptures
take time to grow.
And Jesus illustrated this in Mark chapter 4 verse 26.
Let's just read that.
So he went on to say,
in this way,
the kingdom of God is just as when a man casts seeds on the ground.
Yes, like a farmer,
when we spread the kingdom message,
we're casting seeds.
But do we expect those seeds to sprout overnight?
Jesus explains the growth process in verse 28.
On his own, the ground bears fruit gradually.
First the stalk, then the head,
finally the full grain in the head.
So it's a gradual process.
The farmer waters and nurtures the seed,
but he must wait.
Likewise, we need to be patient disciple makers.
It may take many return visits before we actually start a Bible study.
But on each return visit,
let's try to help the person to progressively build faith in God's word.
Here's an example of how we could help a person come to appreciate
that the Bible has practical, up to date advice.
Once sister does this,
she asks,
what would you say is the key to getting along with people?
May I read a proverb from the Bible?
And she reads Proverbs 17-14,
which says,
beginning a fight is like opening a floodgate
before the quarrel breaks out, take your leave.
And then she asks,
do you think that this advice could help us to get along with others?
A reasonable person would say yes.
How can we help a person build faith
that the Bible was a book of reliable prophecy?
Well, on one return visit,
we could briefly discuss the prophecy in Isaiah 13-20.
This says that the city of Babylon
would never again be inhabited.
Well, 50 miles south of Baghdad, Iraq,
are the runes of Babylon.
No one lives there and no one has for centuries.
How can we help someone build faith
that there exists a creator?
Simply read Hebrews 3-4.
Every house is constructed by someone,
but the one who constructed all things is God.
And then we could ask,
is someone told you that the house you live in constructed itself?
Would you believe them?
Obviously not.
Neither could we really believe
that this whole universe constructed itself.
So brothers and sisters,
this is a powerful tool.
Let's unleash its power in our ministry.
We will become more effective disciple makers
and we will overflow with joy
as we see that word of God at work in a new believer.
Brother David's plane, a member of the governing body,
will now present the next part of this symposium
experience the joy of disciple making,
improve your skills, illustrating key points.
Do you find it easy to think
of effective illustrations for the ministry?
I sure don't,
but some have a real gift for it.
I have a friend like that.
He can look at almost any situation
and think of an illustration.
One day, we were traveling along a mountain road.
I was driving.
My car wasn't very good.
It was the best I could afford at the time.
And suddenly, a red warning light came on.
Quick as a flash, my friend said,
I just thought of a great illustration.
The conscience is like a warning light.
His first thought, an illustration.
His second thought,
oh, we're in trouble.
Illustrations come naturally to him.
It's just like breathing to him.
Some have the gift,
and the rest of us have to work at it.
But why should we work at it?
Why should we learn to use illustrations?
Well, for one thing,
because Jesus used them,
and he was the greatest teacher of them all.
Jesus used illustrations all along,
as we find when we read Matthew chapter 13 and verse 34.
I'll give you a moment.
Let's read this together.
Matthew chapter 13 and verse 34.
All these things, Jesus spoke to the crowds by illustrations.
Indeed, without an illustration,
He would not speak to them.
Jesus knew
that an illustration is often the most effective way
to touch the heart.
And that's especially true
if people are featured in the illustration.
Now, suppose I say,
if you're going along the road
and you see someone in trouble,
stop and help them,
even if he's of a different race.
That's clear.
It makes the point.
Jesus' illustration about the neighborly Samaritan
makes the same point,
but it's so much more effective.
It stirs the emotions.
It engages the mind.
We feel pity for the poor Jew
who fell among thieves.
We feel love for the Samaritan
who stopped to help him
and discussed for the priest
and Levite who didn't stop.
We're determined not to be like them.
An illustration can put a human face on a problem
and reinforce our determination to apply the lesson.
A good illustration can help a Bible student
grasp a point he's been struggling with.
Let's see how that works.
In a conversation,
Nita is having with Jade
in a coffee shop.
Let's do this.
A bit of a neat freak.
You don't say?
So, last time we discussed
how God created us to live forever,
which raises the question,
why do we die?
Totally.
Totally what?
No, like I mean, I totally agree.
That's what we talked about.
Right.
Let's open to Romans 5, verse 12.
Wait, why don't I read it out loud
so we can both enjoy it?
That is why,
just as through one man,
sin entered into the world
and death through sin.
And so death spread to all men
because they had all sinned.
Okay, hold it.
Is Adam the one man?
Exactly.
This doesn't make sense.
You said Adam was perfect and wouldn't die.
That's right.
But then he sins
and loses that.
So what's that got to do with me?
I die because he's stupid.
Well, maybe not how I would have put it.
Maybe we can think of it this way.
When parents with a severe genetic defect
have children,
what happens?
Usually the kids inherit it.
Precisely.
When Adam sinned,
that sin became like a genetic defect
that caused sickness, aging, and death.
And since we're all his children.
Oh.
Brilliant.
I get it.
Why don't we watch a little video
that helps put it all together?
Why was Need's illustration effective?
Jade was struggling to understand
how she could inherit imperfection from Adam,
a man who lived long ago.
And she wasn't going to get past it.
So that was the point Neeta chose to illustrate.
So when you're studying with someone,
choose carefully what you'll illustrate.
Let it be a main point in the lesson,
or an idea that your student is having trouble with.
There has to be a good reason
for using an illustration.
Our illustrations should be appealing.
What do we mean by that?
An illustration will appeal to the student
if it's about something familiar.
Now again, Jesus' parable of the Samaritan
comes to mind.
The setting of the illustration was nearby,
a familiar road between Jerusalem and Jericho.
Not the hanging gardens of Babylon
or the pyramids of Egypt.
And it was realistic.
There were many robberies along that road.
And the attitude of the priest
and Levite toward that poor, injured Jew
totally believable.
Neeta also chose wisely.
Her illustration was about inheriting a birth defect,
something she knew Jade would understand.
Now you may have a couple of go-to illustrations
that you've used for years and years.
And years?
Why not look for fresh ones that make the same points?
Put a little sparkle back on your ministry.
Let's consider two ways of doing that.
First, be observant.
Matthew 6.26, Jesus says,
observe intently the birds of the heavens.
Jesus was aware of his surroundings
and he thought about what he saw.
He observed the housewife,
children playing in the village square,
the farmer,
the rich man with his treasures.
So learn from Jesus,
slow down and smell the flowers.
Then think of an illustration about flowers.
But what if you feel you don't have a creative bone in your body
and yet you still need fresh illustrations?
Our second resource,
our publications,
turn to the Watchtower Publications Index
under illustrations
and you'll find abundance
of beautiful illustrations that have been used in our publications.
And as you're studying our later publications,
take note of the illustrations that are used.
Choose simple illustrations.
Use little things to explain big things
and simple things to explain complicated things.
A sister at a congregation meeting
used a very simple but effective illustration
regarding Jehovah and the ransom.
She said,
when you're shopping,
you never pay full price for damaged goods.
Her point?
We're all damaged goods.
Yet Jehovah paid full price for us
with the life of his son.
The illustration was simple.
It was appealing because it was about something familiar,
shopping.
It was also appropriate to the audience,
there were a lot of batholites in the audience,
and you know batholites never pay full price for anything.
When you're illustrating a point,
avoid distracting the student with minor details.
Minor details,
if they don't fit,
they can get you into a lot of trouble.
If they don't work with the main point of the illustration,
the student may focus on the inconsistencies
and miss the point altogether.
Well, in summary, what do we say?
It takes time to develop good illustrations,
but it's worth the effort.
If you have the gift, use it,
and share it with others.
But if like me, you don't have the gift,
work at it.
You'll be glad you did.
And so will your Bible students.
Now, brother Kenneth Flodin,
a helper to the teaching committee,
will present the next part of the symposium.
Experience the joy of disciplemaking,
improve your skills,
teaching with enthusiasm.
Try, if you will,
to imagine a virus that becomes a global pandemic.
The daily news is ominous.
Fear and panic hold full sway.
Well, that's not too difficult to imagine, isn't it?
But what if they found a cure?
Well, now instantly, the newscaster's tone would change.
He would be enthusiastic.
And why is that?
Because he has good news to share
to the world's population.
Well, how about us?
Please find Isaiah 52-7.
Isaiah 52-7, why should we be enthusiastic
when we teach those who have been exposed
to the evil viruses of Satan's old world?
Well, it's because we have the best news ever
to share with the world's population.
Notice how this is brought out Isaiah 52-7.
It says, how beautiful on the mountains
are the feet of the one bringing good news,
the one proclaiming peace,
the one bringing good news of something better,
the one proclaiming salvation,
the one saying in Zion,
your God has become king.
Yes, we have good news that's better
than conquering one perturbing virus.
Now, in the videos of this symposium,
you probably noticed that initially,
Nida was enthused,
and a regular Bible study has been established with Jade.
But it's our continued enthusiasm
that can help keep a student interested
and motivate them to act.
Now, in the following dramatization,
you will note that Nida learns the importance
of maintaining enthusiasm.
Knee to your fullest.
It's Jade again.
We've only studied once this month.
She's so unscheduled.
I thought you said she was doing well.
She was.
Now it's just, see you later.
How was your last study?
That's a very interesting question,
but it's not really what we're talking about in this paragraph, is it?
So, let's just read the scripture, shall we?
In my defense, I was annoyed.
She never even attempts to explain why she can't solve.
I understand.
Really, I do.
But if she's still open to studying,
you can't let these little things drain your enthusiasm.
I know.
I just...
I wish she was more structured.
It's like she doesn't take anything seriously.
No studies perfect.
She's making some effort.
Focus on that.
If anyone's enthusiasm is contagious, it's yours.
I haven't mentioned it already.
I really love our chats.
And I appreciate all your questions.
Thanks.
I know sometimes they're crazy.
No, you're a deep thinker.
It's good for both of us.
Okay.
Yeah, we're cool.
Do you remember when Nita first met Jade?
Jade said, like, I'm jaded.
The English word jaded means made dull, apathetic or cynical.
And we just noticed that Nita was annoyed with Jade.
She became dull, apathetic, unenthusiastic because of Jade's attitude.
But that affected Nita's enthusiasm.
And it had a circular effect, likely contributing to Jade's seeming lack of interest.
Well, how do we develop enthusiasm?
You likely noticed that Nita and Jade, they speak the same language, well, almost.
But there are two totally different personalities.
We could be teaching someone of a totally different cultural background.
But the good news is, enthusiasm crosses all boundaries.
Please find with me Romans 12-11.
Romans 12.
And it's good to remember that enthusiasm is not just some giddy outward show of excitement.
It actually happens from within us.
Romans 12-11.
Be industrious, not lazy.
Be a glow with the spirit.
Slave for Jehovah.
We want to highlight that matter of being a glow with the spirit.
The word translated a glow literally means boiling.
So to maintain enthusiasm, we need a constant flow of God's Holy Spirit.
That's like the heat source that keeps us boiling.
So how do we prepare to teach a Bible student?
Well, we might think, well, I like to go over the lesson in advance.
And I remind myself of what the cited scriptures say.
And that's good. That's necessary.
But that all is just happening in our head.
How do we get the water boiling inside?
Do you remember the suggestion in Ezra 7-10?
Ezra there said that he prepared his heart to teach.
Well, if that thought in mind, please find Psalm 45-1.
We need to click the download button.
We need to download from our head to our heart.
Notice how the heart's involved here.
Psalm 45-1 says,
My heart, it does not say my head.
My heart is stirred by something good.
I say, my song is about a king.
May my tongue be the stylus of a skilled copyist.
It said, my heart is stirred.
Interestingly, the word translated stirred also means to boil or bubble up.
And what's the result if we get that action going inside of us?
The end of the verse said that my tongue, in other words, my speech will be skilled.
Yes, we improve our skills as a disciple maker when we maintain enthusiasm.
And we get our enthusiasm bubbling, boiling, stirred up.
When we meditate on the importance of the lesson we're about to teach.
And my wife likes to watch cooking shows on television.
And I've noticed that invariably there's always an electric blender.
And I do realize that in some of your cultures, you might prefer mortar and pestle,
a sharp knife to cut things up and mix them together.
But we have all those ingredients laid out on the counter before us,
maybe vegetables, herbs, spices, all we salt and pepper.
What is that like?
That's like having the ingredients in our mind.
We've gone over the lesson in advance.
We have the scriptures. We know what they say.
But we really don't get enthused about that tasty dish until what happens.
We mix all those ingredients in the blender.
We bring it up to temperature, maybe even a boil.
And then after the dish is done and we taste it, it tastes so good.
We get enthusiastic.
We tell others about this great recipe.
Now they're interested.
And they want to taste this culinary sensation as well.
So how do we become enthusiastic?
Meditate.
Meditation is the blender.
We take all the ingredients in our mind.
We mix them together into a message that we're now enthused to share with others.
And meditation includes asking ourselves questions to prepare the heart.
For example, before your study, you might ask,
how has this information benefited me personally?
And Neeta needed to ask herself,
why does Jade need to hear this?
Maybe it's the perfect point at the right time for our student.
And so we should ask,
how will what I'm going to study benefit my student?
Meditation stirs the heart.
Please find with me first lesson on Chapter 1.
Enthusiasm or zeal should not be confused with being overly emotional.
That'd be like throwing too much hot pepper into the blender over emotional.
And our heartfelt conviction should not cross the line
and become dogmatic as to what our student must believe.
See if you get the sense of this recipe in First Estelonians 1.5.
It says, because the good news we preach did not come to you with speech alone.
In other words, not just words out of the head,
but notice the ingredients.
It says also with power and with Holy Spirit and with strong conviction.
When we've meditated on the material and we deliver it from the heart,
it's reflected in our gestures, our facial expressions.
We come across as natural, sincere,
but you see animated with proper enthusiasm.
If you're enthusiastic about Bible truths, it is contagious,
but in a very good way.
Your Bible student will not become jaded, dull, apathetic.
Instead, your student will be enthusiastic, just like you, his teacher.
And now we have the proofies of having brother Seth Hyatt.
He's a helper for the service committee to present the next part on our symposium,
experience the joy of disciple making, improve your skills, showing empathy.
Empathy is a quality that is essential for effective disciple making.
Interestingly, the word empathy doesn't occur in the main text of the New World translation,
but the idea is clearly conveyed in expressions like fellow feeling.
Jehovah and Jesus Christ are beautiful examples of ones who display empathy in their dealings with authors.
For example, Jehovah said to his people,
whoever touches you touches the pupil of my eye, empathy.
And when Jesus was approached by a leper, begging to be healed,
what was Jesus' response?
The account tells us he reached out his hand, touched the man and said,
I want to, empathy.
Empathy is the ability to understand another person's thinking, feelings, concerns, anxieties.
It may not come naturally, but it can be cultivated.
The scriptures provide us with examples of individuals who were empathetic.
For example, the Apostle Paul, who was a very effective disciple maker, was also empathetic.
Turn in your Bible, please, to 1 Thessalonians, chapter 2, and let's read verses 7 and 8.
On the contrary, we became gentle in your midst.
As when a nursing mother tenderly cares for her own children.
So having tender affection for you, we were determined to impart to you not only the good news of God,
but also our very selves, because you became so beloved to us.
How did Paul approach his ministry?
Well, he says he was gentle.
He displayed tender affection.
And those who responded to the good news became beloved to him.
Paul uses a very powerful illustration, that of a mother caring for her children.
In the human context, there is probably no more powerful example of empathy than that of a mother.
She feels her child's pain.
When her child rejoices, she rejoices.
When her child weeps, she weeps.
Empathy.
And did you notice, Paul said he was determined to impart not only the good news of God,
but his own soul.
Isn't it true as we help individuals today?
It's not a matter of only imparting the facts of the truth.
Bible students need help in many ways.
And like the Apostle Paul, we're self-sacrificing, willing to put the interests of others ahead of our own interests.
We're empathetic.
In the following dramatization, take note of how Nina provides practical assistance to her Bible student.
It's fine. This is mine. My treat.
Brilliant. Thanks. I didn't have any breakfast.
So, we left off at paragraph 10.
Listen, I don't have it in me today. I got like two hours sleep.
You are right.
Just super stressed. I can't focus.
I'm really sorry.
My boyfriend, school, work, everything else.
I just don't even have time to breathe.
When my schedule gets a bit crazy, I focus on organizing what I can.
How's that?
I give everything a proper place.
Yeah, I'm not really the organization type.
But I can help. I mean, if you want.
I guess a little help couldn't hurt.
So, how organized is your place right now?
K. Well, where should we start?
You're the neat freak. You tell me.
Let's try and find the bed. We'll work from there.
Did you notice how did Nina display empathy?
Well, she was observant.
She was a good listener.
And she offered practical assistance, didn't she?
She had some food for her Bible student.
And at the end of the dramatization, she was helping in other practical ways.
And I think we would all agree she showed fellow feeling for her Bible student.
You and I have to do these things as well.
Be observant. What do you know about your Bible student?
What are the student's circumstances in life?
What is the student's family situation?
Does the student have hobbies?
Entrists?
What is the religious background?
What does your student believe?
Well, be observant and ask good questions.
And when you ask a question, give your student time to answer.
What is our inclination when we ask our student a question,
and the answer doesn't come quickly?
We tend to jump in to save our student,
but that approach isn't really helpful.
When you ask a question, be patient.
Allow the student time to think and to respond.
And when the student responds, be positive.
Commend the student for being honest, forthright,
even if the answer is not exactly what you were hoping for.
And keep in mind, as we observe and listen,
and ask questions and display personal interest,
we're very careful not to pry into matters that are really not our business.
And we don't want to show inappropriate interest
by becoming overly familiar with a Bible student.
Does your Bible student need practical assistance?
Well, as we listen and observe,
we're in a position to share information
that will be truly helpful to the student.
Avoid the tendency, the temptation,
to give superficial advice.
It's much better to meditate, do research,
and then you can give the student tailored Bible-based advice
taken from Bible-based publications
that specifically address the student's needs.
And that is beautiful.
Be prepared too to explain how to apply the counsel.
People's lives are so complicated.
They face so many challenges they may not know.
So explain, but don't pressure.
The best change always comes from the inside out.
In other words, the Bible student's heart should motivate him
or to make necessary adjustments in life.
Does your student need transportation to the Kingdom Hall?
Well, assist.
It may be that you can provide transportation yourself,
or it may be a matter of helping the student
to know where the Kingdom Hall is
and then helping him to understand the public transportation system.
But whatever help is needed, take those steps.
Ensure that your student has wholesome association.
As time goes by,
your student is sure to lose former associates,
either because the student decides
or the former associates decide.
Fill the void.
And include your student in gatherings
and keeping with his spiritual advancement and as appropriate.
Finally, show fellow feeling.
Remember, empathy is not a technique.
It's a quality that springs from the heart.
And it's communicated in so many ways.
Not just our words and our actions,
our facial expressions, our gestures, our body language,
all communicate a message to the student.
And the student will discern very quickly
if our words and actions are motivated by love.
If they are, then we are demonstrating empathy
and reflecting the love and concern that Jehovah has for the Bible student.
And that is what will draw the student to Jehovah.
What a privilege we have to share in this vital disciple-making work
with Jehovah's help may each of us succeed in showing the quality of empathy.
Brother Gary Broho, a helper to the service committee,
will now present the final part of the symposium.
Experience the joy of disciple-making.
Improve your skills, reaching the heart.
For anyone to become a servant of Jehovah,
they must have gods were deeply implanted in their hearts.
Now, why is it so necessary for us to understand that?
And what skills will help us to reach the heart of our students?
Jesus gave an indication in His illustration of the soar.
It's found in Matthew chapter 13, and we'll read verse 19.
Matthew 13, verse 19.
It says, where anyone hears the word of the kingdom,
but does not get the sense of it, the wicked one comes and snatches away
what has been so in his heart.
So the word of the kingdom is likened to seeds and the soil to the figurative heart.
Now, the figurative heart represents what a person is inside.
It involves his feelings, his affections, his desires, his motives.
Also, what he thinks about and how those thoughts affect decisions in his life.
If you look back at verse 19, Jesus said that the seed in this case didn't grow
because the individual didn't get the sense of the good news.
Now, Jesus has given all of us this assignment to make disciples of people of all nations
and baptizing them.
So our teaching needs to help our students get the sense of the good news
and that's going to move them to action.
Proverbs chapter 3 and verse 1 highlights an importance of this type of teaching to us.
It's Proverbs 3 and verse 1.
It says, my son, do not forget my teaching and may your heart observe my commandments.
So obedience to God must come from the heart as it indicates.
So brothers and sisters, it's our responsibility to learn how to reach the heart of our students
so that their thinking, their feelings, their reasonings will move them to be obedient to Jehovah God.
As you watch the following dramatization, notice how Nita strives to reach the heart of her Bible student.
Think any more about what we talked about on Monday?
I did.
But why would Jehovah make a rule like that?
No sex unless you're married. It's totally okay.
It might seem odd, but what quality do you most appreciate about Jehovah?
Who's love? Me too.
So if he truly loves us, look at what he tells us at Isaiah 48 verse 17.
I, Jehovah, am your God, your God, Jade.
The one teaching you to benefit yourself, the one guiding you in the way you should walk.
I don't get it. It just doesn't make sense.
Question. Does a little child always understand why mum and dad warns them not to do certain things?
Probably not.
So why are the rules and warnings?
Well, they love them, don't they?
And so if Jehovah loves you, it often takes time to appreciate why Jehovah asks certain things of us.
But if we really love him, we'll have faith that what he asks is for the best.
The real question is, do you trust him?
I won't do. I really do.
This was a good example of how a Bible study conductor reaches the heart of a student.
Nida was calmly helping Jade to link what she was learning in her study to her relationship with Jehovah God.
It was not an intellectual exercise, so to speak, helping her to gain more knowledge about a certain subject.
Now it's really helping the student to connect the dots, so to speak.
See how the material applies to decisions that they're making in their life.
Throughout the Bible study, we want to constantly direct attention to Jehovah God.
And if we're talking too much as the teacher, it's going to be hard to accomplish that.
Your effective use of questions can help them connect their Bible knowledge that they're receiving to the qualities of Jehovah God that's going to make them love him.
Qualities such as his love, his goodness, and his righteousness.
Here's an example of a question that might be used.
Why do you think Jehovah would forbid a certain action?
See, that kind of question is helping your student begin to understand the thinking of Jehovah God on matters.
Did you notice it was not a yes or no question?
The question actually started with why?
And now that forces the student to go to another level of their thought process to explain the reason Jehovah forbids certain actions.
And that's a very good method of reaching the heart of a student.
Here's an example of another question.
How does this show you that Jehovah is a loving father?
There again, not a yes or no question.
It's this time started with how?
And that now requires the student to identify the evidence that proves that Jehovah is a loving father.
Did you notice in the video that needless questions were touching Jade's heart?
She was skilled at her choice of questions, but also in the tone of voice when she was asking those questions.
She was not hurried or impatient to get an answer.
She quietly waited for Jade to meditate on the question.
Her method of teaching demonstrated a Bible principle that would be helpful for us to review.
And it's found in Proverbs chapter 20 and verse 5.
And Proverbs 20 and verse 5.
It says, the thoughts of a man's heart are like deep waters, but the discerning man draws them out.
And so the thoughts of a student are not always easily discernible.
As it takes, it really takes a skill teacher to draw those out like deep waters the verse indicates.
Through tactful questions then, you can help your student to examine how they feel about what they are learning.
Some simple questions will help you do that.
For instance, how do you feel about or what convinces you that or how would you react if?
See, those are excellent questions to help to draw up the inner feelings of your student.
Now, there's a caution in this process because generally it's going to take time to gain the trust of the student,
so they'll be comfortable expressing their feelings.
As the students love for Jehovah increases, they'll be motivated to make changes in their lives to please Jehovah God.
First John 5 verse 3 says, this is what the love of God means that we observe His commandments.
So obedience to His commandments then is linked to love for Him.
And then addition, love for fellow humans, love for the Bible teachings that they're learning is going to help them to make any needed adjustments to their thinking.
Rather than shame your student, help them to reason on the benefits of correcting wrong viewpoints.
You call how Nida handle the situation with Jade.
When Jade said Jehovah's law against having sex before marriage was totally archaic.
Well, instead of scolding her, Nida skillfully used an example of a child not understanding the rules and regulations of the parent.
And you could see as she was discussing that Jade started to make the connection that Jehovah's law is really an expression of His love for her just as a parent loves their child.
Once the student develops this relationship with Jehovah God and desires to make Jehovah's heart happy,
that's going to be the strongest motive for the individual to make whatever changes are necessary in their life to please Jehovah.
While it is a privilege to be involved in the work of making disciples, Jehovah wants us to also enjoy this work.
That was certainly the case with the Apostle Paul.
Open your Bible to 1 Thessalonians chapter 2, 19 and 20.
And let's see how he felt about God's message changing the lives of those that he preached to.
It's 1 Thessalonians 2, 19 and 20.
For what is our hope or joy or crown of exultation before our Lord Jesus at His presence?
Is it not in fact you? You certainly are our glory and joy.
Few joys in life can compare with helping someone come to an accurate knowledge of the truth and watch them to progress to dedication and baptism.
We are so thankful to receive Jehovah's Holy Spirit and His guidance in helping us in this disciple making work.
But we too must do our part in diligently improving in our skills.
As this six-part symposium has highlighted, as we do our part in improving our teaching skills and all aspects of our ministry,
we will find greater joy as God's fellow workers.
Thank you, brothers, for those instructive talks.
No doubt all of us could see areas in which we can improve as teachers.
Please stand now if you are able to do so.
And let us sing together song number 58, which is entitled, Searching for Friends of Peace.
That song number 58.